ARCTURUS END-OF-YEAR REVIEW

The new Arcturus project has now been running for nearly a year.
I thought it would be a good time to look back on what we have
achieved.

This time last year, the Arcturus project was stalled. It had
lost direction and momentum, and it was unlikely that it would
ever deliver a usable product.

I raised these concerns with PSU management at a meeting in
December 2003, and I recommended that work on Arcturus should
begin again from scratch.

I presented a detailed set of proposals which would form the
foundation of a new Arcturus project:

* We should adopt more formal software engineering methods
  instead of an ad hoc approach to software development. This
  would allow us to maintain better control of the project and
  to monitor its progress more effectively.

* We should recognise that Arcturus is a large and complex
  software system, similar in scope to Ensembl, but without
  Ensembl's level of resources. I recommended an incremental
  development strategy which would allow the system to be
  developed and released in stages.

  The first release would be the core system and a simple but
  functional user interface, which would provide all of the
  essential features for the finishing teams.

* We should base the design of the system around the objects
  which it is meant to handle (reads, contigs, assemblies, etc.)
  and the relationships between them.

* We should focus on the needs of the users of the system,
  especially the  finishing teams. We should ask them what
  they want the system to do, and we should consult with them
  regularly throughout the project to make sure that their
  needs are driving what we do.

* We should hold review meetings every two to three months.
  The review team should include representatives of the
  finishing teams, PSU management and the software developers.

WHERE WE ARE NOW

We are halfway through the 18-month development timetable for 
the first release of Arcturus. Most aspects of the project are
on schedule.

We already have a preliminary assembly pipeline which can run
incremental assemblies using the Arcturus databases.

We have recently released a simple user interface for viewing
assemblies and groups of contigs.

We have demonstrated the usefulness of even a half-completed
core system by calculating scaffolds and super-scaffolds for
projects such as EIMER.

MUCH REMAINS TO BE DONE

The core system is still under development. At present, it
can manage reads and contigs. We are currently adding tag
handling. The next task will be to complete the work on
projects, which are the Arcturus equivalent of split Gap4
databases.

We have identified some problems in integrating Arcturus with
Gap4, but we are confident that we will be able to resolve
these early in the new year, with help from Rob and James.

We will continue to develop the user interface in close
consultation with the finishing teams, and this work will
benefit from experience gained from an Open University course
on the design of effective user interfaces.

THINGS ARE LOOKING GOOD

The project has been noticed outside the PSU. There is even
talk of using it to manage large non-PSU projects.

The extensive experience which we have gained in using MySQL
has also been recognised outside the PSU. The DBA team often
ask our advice when faced with tricky MySQL questions.

The new Arcturus project has made better progress in nine
months than its predecessor did in almost three years, and
the first release is on course to be delivered on schedule
in autumn 2005.
